Office of Debbie Messing Hamlin, and this is the
15th of March, 1985. And we're here to discuss with
Debbie her role in the department. So, Debbie, let
me just double. Okay, I'm the Community
Development Administrator for the city, and I've
been with the city about 10 years, and I have a
master's in planning. I started out with the
planning department 10 years ago, And I did
general planning for about three or four years
under Mr. Cunningham. And then when
grants were introduced to the city, I transferred
laterally. And I've been working with community
development block grants ever since, including
EDAG grants, economic development grants,
whatever kind of grant programs that we happen to
administer.
Okay, Debbie, I've been talking with Nestor, and
he's answered some of these questions already.
But I wanted to ask you what the role of private
planning consultants has been in El Paso's
development. Okay. We've retained two major
consultants in the last few years. For our
downtown plan, we've retained American Cities
Corporation, which is a subsidiary of the Rouse
Corporation. They came in and prepared a downtown
implementation plan for the city. And with that
plan, we were able to generate a UDAG for our
downtown. And that included a $6 million UDAG for
the revitalization and restoration of two major
buildings. One will be a downtown hotel, the other
a major office building. Both of them are National
Register properties, and they generate about $40
million worth of private sector money. And that's
the first major... What's the name of the hotel?
The Paso Del Norte Hotel and the Cortez Office
Building. We remember the Paso Del Norte Hotel
because we had you arranged, essentially, the AIP
conference there for the Texas chapter in 19...
Oh, gosh, it's been about 1979. 79, was it? Or 78,
something like that. And that one will be totally
restored. And right next to it will be constructed
a 20-story tower, which will be designed in the old
style to complement the Paso Morning Hotel. And
then the Cortez office building, which is also a
Trost National Register property, will be
restored into office and parking garage. That is
essentially the first major development,
public-private partnership downtown, and we're
hoping it'll spur on more development downtown.
We also have retained Zuckelly Hunter, which is
Z-U-C-H-E-L-L-I, Hunter Consultants, to
prepare a downtown revitalization project. plan
and program for implementation in downtown
Isleta, which is in our lower valley. That's an
area that was incorporated into the city about 50
or 60 years ago and has some of the oldest missions
and some of our oldest history in El Paso, the Tegua
Indians and so on. We also retain the housing, the
Historical American Buildings Survey crew out of
Washington a couple of years ago did a mission
trail study which goes down into our valley and
some of the information that the killing hunters
use, they'll be using from the Habs people. Where
is the Sukelle 100 firm located? I keep wanting to
think they're out of Boston, but I think they're
also out of somewhere around Maryland. They're
out of the East Coast. East Coast. In both cases,
the city looked around and did a request for
proposals to research which firms would be the
best suited for El Paso, and we're hoping that
we'll be able to implement some of their
recommendations out of both studies. We since, I
should say, retained American Cities again since
the downtown master plan to do a remarketing study
for downtown El Paso. We've been hurt very badly by
the Paso devaluation and our retailers are asking
that they be helped to understand what the market
really is now and to possibly remarket their their
businesses for better retail. So we're working
with them to do that. We're also waiting for Ralph
to come to El Paso in March. Oh, this March, this
month. There will be a public announcement after
that as to whether or not Ralph will be committing
to El Paso further to possibly bring a large retail
component to our district. We'll see what happens
there. And then you mentioned the planning
department has... Yes. We have funded, the
community development program has funded
$50,000 to the planning department to update
their comprehensive plan. And I believe that the
city is also matching that share. And hopefully
they'll be retaining a consultant. I don't
believe they have any, but they'll be retaining a
consultant to do an update. Okay. Going on to the
next question, about the five or so major events
that have affected El Paso's planning and the
development of El Paso.
I think the Chamizal Treaty was a major
development in El Paso, rerouting the river and
causing changes to the land use and development to
El Paso space. And that's been 15 years, I guess, or
20. That's C-H-A-M-I-Z-A-L treaty. Mr.
Cunningham was the major force in that treaty.
Like I said, it did reroute the river through El
Paso. I understand most of the land had to be given
to Mexico. Yes, a lot of it did. There was a lot of
relocation of homes also. That was during
President Johnson's administration? Yeah,
President. He came to El Paso during that time. Oh,
he did visit El Paso as president. Yeah, so did
Kennedy right during that. It was right during the
Kennedy-Johnson. Uh-huh. And they created a
monument for Kennedy over there. They think he's
quite impressive. I see. They equated him sort of
to Lincoln, so they have,
I guess they, yeah, they did have two presidents.
Two special movements between them at the same
time. Another big, I guess, I think change has been
the takeover of the more national banks over our
local banking industry here in El Paso. And that
probably was looked upon originally as a negative
takeover because people like to keep their things
home. But I think it will be a good injection into
the El Paso economy. very concerned about the
downtown. They want to see it prosper. And they
seem to be interested in working with private and
public parties to try and inject money into El Paso
for that purpose. I think another big change has
been the development of the north-south and
east-west freeways in El Paso and they have
spurred development in both directions and the
land use has definitely changed along both those
routes. There was a major amount of course of
relocation to perform both of those
developments, but they have changed, like I say,
especially in the eastern part of El Paso where it
was all desert and there was really no way to get
downtown to the west side. Um, way past Fort Bliss
and out toward, um, I guess that's I-10. Um, and
then I think, What was the other thing you were
talking about? Fort Bliss. Fort Bliss, right.
Fort Bliss used to be a major base in El Paso, and
then they cut way down. They didn't have their
basic training here anymore, and it really hurt
our economy. It appears now that the government's
decided to go ahead and reenact that basic
training element and also train a lot of foreign
military here in El Paso. So that will be a big
injection of the economy. OK. Anything else? One
thing I need to mention, and you probably will
share this a little bit more, is the development of
our mountain, which has been a major impact on El
Paso space. We've had a lot of controversy about
how to develop it and the city has been looking into
a lot of other cities as to how they develop their
mountain areas and there's been a lot of scarring
of the mountain because there wasn't good
planning in the beginning. There's been a lot of
anxiety to the, you know, to El Paso's El Paso has a
lot of pride in the mountain. We'd like to keep it as
it is. Of course, it's in the hands of private
ownership, so we have developed a new mountain
development ordinance and so on to try and
regulate it as best we can. We're trying to do that
now. Where is the wilderness area? The wilderness
park, you can see it from here. It's actually the
Franklin Mountains. This is the western side. As
we look from City Hall to the mountain, the
Wilderness Park area is really on the eastern side
of the mountain. And it was an estate swap,
basically, for that land to become Wilderness
Park. Part of that mountain is now hidden in the
clouds, but that wilderness park is at the very
top.
Some 200, I don't remember how many acres of that
there is, but probably Nestor could tell
you that. When you think a minute about events
caused by governments and so forth at the national
level or the state government, or Mexico in your
case, what events have influenced planning in El
Paso, if any?
One event that has been a major implication is
really the discussion of water and how it's going
to affect El Paso's future. And I think the state of
New Mexico and the state of Texas have been in
litigation for some time now about the usage of
their bolsons and so on for El Paso's water. And
some of the latest litigation has ended in El
Paso's favor, but it's being contested. And this
time, you know, we're very concerned because
water is... is supposedly going to be depleted in
the next 30 or 40 years here. And that will
definitely impact on El Paso's future
development. So that has been one big state type of
involvement we've been involved in the last two
years in a major way. As far as Mexico goes, the peso
devaluation has impacted us tremendously.
Negatively, it has. both from the retail market
that I described earlier and also in the fact that
it's put a lot more people into El Paso, probably
illegally and legally, trying to get to the United
States to work because they've been hurt
tremendously over there. I've heard that to work
in their... industry for one week, they may get $3
of American money. So they're coming over here in
droves trying to find employment, which is
impacting our own employment, which is extremely
high, let's say 11%. We can't get our own people
jobs, and we've got a lot of people from Mexico
coming over here seeking employment also. That's
neat. What administrative procedures and
planning program elements does El Paso have for
implementing community plans?
Can you sort of give me some... For example, you
have a separate department now here. That
certainly is an administrative procedure that is
different from most communities. Is it? I
wasn't... I don't know how... Yeah, I guess it is
different. Basically, yeah, we're a separate
department.
We try and tie in, of course, with planning as much
as we can. They perform the long-range planning.
We perform the short-range annual planning,
pretty much. We are not involved at all in the
subdivision and land use aspect. Strictly, we're
looking at redevelopment of our older areas and to
make them more viable neighborhoods.
We're also involved in the economic development
end of it, in that we have several economic
development revolving loan funds here, which
we're trying to provide the gap financing to small
businesses that need financing that they can't
get from the banks. And as we see, one of our main
functions here and our goals is to try and increase
the employment aspect. So we're working toward
that. How many professional planners does El Paso
have employed as part of city staff? That is to say,
planners with planning degrees and so forth. In
this department, I'm the only one.
We have about 35 people employed here. And I was
like an offshoot from planning department, so I'm
just an implant. The planning department, let's
see, I think they probably have, with planning
degrees or related urban study degrees, maybe
they have five or six. That's all. What future
direction do you see El Paso's planning efforts
taking in the next 10 years?
I think we're all hoping that we can do more
redevelopment of our inner city, and we're also
hoping that we can maybe do more infill
development in our older areas, rather than
continuing to do the sprawl, which is where we've
been headed. El Paso has grown tremendously fast
in the last 20 years. I mean, I talked to our traffic
engineer two days ago about traffic problems, and
he related something to me that's kind of
interesting. We were talking about the need to
create Loop 72, 372 around the city because we have
some traffic problems. I said, well, what kind of
traffic problems do we have? He goes, well, for
instance, in 1962 on Montana Street, We had like
82,000 cars, and now we have 210,000. So, I mean, we
have a tremendous amount of growth that's
occurred in El Paso in a short time. I believe it's
because we're a Sunbelt city. On the other hand, we
haven't been able to get a handle on our pollution
problems, and we haven't been able to get a handle
on our growth problems, which are seeming to
spread in all directions. So I think we're
probably going to be hoping to...
do more and better planning in our own inner city
area and get a handle on all the illegal
subdivision growth going on on the outside, more
control, subdivision and zoning. Does the
Planning Commission support staff in these
matters? They have been pretty supportive, I
think. And the council? The council, yeah. I think
the council has been. We have a very strong mayor
right now that is from the land development
community. He is one of the major property owners
in the city. He was also the president until last
year of one of the largest mortgage-making
industries in El Paso. And his name? Jonathan
Rogers. So he has been a very pro-development but
good development man, and I think it's been good
for El Paso. What was the name of the mayor that
Jonathan Cunningham worked so closely with? He
was in office for so many mayors. I guess John
Henderson, Fred Hervey. Fred Hervey was the mayor
twice when he was in office. And he paved the first
streets. I mean, I think probably it would be Fred
Hervey. And he was very active in the development.
And he still is a major mover in the development
community.
El Paso has a strong mayor form of government. That
sometimes is very difficult for the planning
function of local government to work with. Are
there any moves toward city managers for El Paso or
not, and how do you think that might eventually
work itself out? I think in the last year, the city
just created a new position under the mayor called
the Executive Administrator or Assistant. And
that is right now filled by Dr. Kenneth Beasley.
Where does he come from? He comes from the
university system. And the mayor brought him in
when he was elected, Mayor Rogers did. And he has
created that very strong position in salaries in
the $60,000 range. And that is the first time we've
ever had a funded position of that kind. And he acts
sort of like a city manager, but he is not called a
city manager. And I think he doesn't really have
exactly the powers of a city manager. I don't think
El Paso will move in that direction only because
we've seen cities around El Paso like Las Cruces
that have gone through many city managers, and
they're smaller. It's a much smaller city than El
Paso, 40,000, 50,000 population. I think we've
seen historically that cities that... have the
nature of the population we have around,
approaching half a million, I mean, yeah,
500,000, half a million now, that they don't
really work well in cities that big. And I'm not
sure El Paso will move in that direction,
although, like I say, we sort of, this is the first,
this is now, we're moving into our second or third
year with this particular kind of individual in
that position, and it has worked pretty well. He
is... The mayor has relied on him heavily to make
administrative decisions and has told the
department heads that they are to go to him and
solve all their problems before they ever get to
him. So he's sort of acted in that capacity, but has
not really called that or have the same sort of
powers as the city manager has. Does he have
authority over personnel?
Yes and no. He works extremely close with the
personnel department and the personnel
director. He has helped to shape the change of the
new city charter. So there has been some
influence, yet I'm not real sure the nature. How
strong is a city manager tied to that? Do you know,
Bob? Usually the city manager is in charge of all
personnel. Okay, he, no, he doesn't. With the
exception of the city attorney. Okay, the city
personnel director here is still very strong and
runs the city personnel department. But like I
said, this individual does work very strongly
with you. So there is some similarity there, but
not clear-cut. And I don't think that when the new
city charter changes just were passed by the
overall city last year, they did not incorporate
that change into it. the city charter, so I don't
know if we're going to be going in that direction
anymore. I sort of doubt it. El Paso has quite a long
history of comprehensive city-wide planning. Do
you see that changing?
I do. I do. I think that the city is really moving
toward more of an implementation planning. I
mean, I think that the long-range plan is
important. But I think we're seeing that it can't
be that long range. The time frame is going to have
to be reduced. I think it probably will have to be
reduced. That's my opinion. I think that when we
look at what is realistic now and what we really
need to shoot for, I think the longer range plans
are becoming that effective or haven't been that
effective in the past. So I would see a move away
from that. Has the policies of the Reagan
administration, have they had any effect on El
Paso's planning and development? I think if
they're implemented the way he wants them,
they'll have major disastrous effect on the city.
For instance, in revenue sharing, El Paso, in the
last few years, has used their revenue sharing
monies, most of them for operational rather than
capital improvements, 97%. So if they were to be
cut, it would affect us disastrously in the
operational. area of the city and how it runs.
Another good example of how it would affect El
Paso, if they cut CDBG money. out totally, which is
not looked at. They're not looking at doing that.
But for instance, if they did, we are right now
representing half of the city's capital
improvements budget. If it's $15 million, we're
representing half of it right now. That would hurt
us tremendously. They're not looking at doing
that. They're looking at maybe a 10% or 20% cut. It
would still affect a major effect. We have been
increasing our taxes slowly in El Paso, but
historically we have not been a big proponent of
raising taxes substantially. We're a relatively
very poor city. compared to most other Texas
cities. For instance, in our own program here, we
have many houses a year. We spend about $2 or $3
million annually. We have homes of families that
have less than $4,500 incomes. So we have not
historically been a city that's raised taxes. So
we may have to start looking at that or some
alternative bond issues or something else to
raise money to do capital improvements if
Reagan's plans to cut us federally come through.
So it will hurt us tremendously. Can you think of
any additional thoughts that might affect El
Paso's future in terms of the direction it takes in
planning?
This
is the second part of the interview with Anne
Cunningham. Anne,
regarding the major individuals who instigated
or strongly affected El Paso's planning
programs, Could you recall some of these
individuals and also indicate in what way they
affected planning in El Paso? I do remember two
outstanding chairmen of the City Planning
Commission that served with John very well and
contributed so much of their time and
thoughtfulness and genuine unselfishness to the
cause of city planning. The two men I remember
distinctly are Mr. Herbert Swartz of the popular
department store who gave up so much of his time and
even some of his property to develop a downtown
little park to beautify the city and served
judiciously and well as a planning commissioner
and director of the planning commission. Do you
know what period that was? What years? I can't
recall the years, but they could be researched.
Another good gentleman who served with
distinction was Mr. Leonard Goodman. He and
Jonathan worked so well together and did
accomplish so many fine decisions with the help of
a good commission at the time. Two fine mayors that
I recall. One, Judson Williams, a man that
Jonathan felt was a fine administrator, willing
to take responsibility, make decisions, and then
put them into effect. He also enjoyed working with
Burt Williams, who was a flamboyant and fun mayor,
and yet a mayor with a great deal of courage, a mayor
unlike any other mayor I believe in the United
States had the courage to sue a circle for
polluting the city.
Remember Burt Williams? Yes, didn't he have his
own airplane? I don't remember that. That would
fly here and there? I don't think Burt had an
airplane, to my knowledge, but he may have. One of
the mayors had that John was very close to. Really?
I'd forgotten that detail.
Now, there were some good women on the planning
commissions, too. I shouldn't overlook their
names.
And forgive me for not remembering them right now.
Well, you can write them in later on when I send you
the transcription. All right. OK. Think a minute
of about the half dozen most important events that
have occurred in El Paso in terms of planning. Just
briefly enumerate them. Well, I think always of
the Shamizal National Memorial Park as a cultural
center for the city, funded and helped by the
federal government. Then I think of the
interstate freeway development system that
Jonathan worked so diligently to get rooted
properly through the city with the greatest
amount of efficiency and beauty in other words he
made an underpass under the city rather than put
put the interstate up high on stilts over the city
so that it would not detract from the city skyline
and he was proud of that fact now the other planning
events in El Paso. We've already mentioned the
park system. And then you had some reference to the
school. Oh, I think whenever the public schools,
community college, and UT El Paso asked Jonathan
for advice for site planning or site additions or
genuine
concerns about planning parking space or
extending their genuine areas to be more
serviceable to the community. Jonathan
willingly studied these situations as carefully
as he could and gave them good advice. In fact, many
of the school locations, community college
locations, were suggested by Jonathan and they
have turned out to be useful and efficient. Would
you care to recall the selection of the location
for the Civic Center? That I do remember. John felt
that it should be, of course, accessible
primarily for people living in all sections of
this city. And his site selection downtown easily
entered by people from east, northeast, west El
Paso via the interstate, is fine and has turned out
to be the best possible location that a civic
center could have for a city of our size. It was
quite controversial before it was constructed.
At the time, many did criticize the site. yet it was
acquired
within the economic bounds of the city's ability,
and it also geographically,
and from the point of view of accessibility, as I
said before, was just fine, and it still is. The
railroads. In the Kessler Plan, George Kessler,
Noted in 1925, or actually it was before that, that
the railroads had numerous grade crossings with
downtown streets, and the plan called for their
eventual removal. As I understand it, John moved
as best he could to implement that proposal, the
original proposal. plan for El Paso. Yes, he did
feel that the railroads did detract from the
downtown area and moved to have them put
underground and wanted them not to obstruct the
transportation within the city. I remember he had
many, many meetings with the directors of the
railroads that came into El Paso, too. see if grade
crossings could be better for the use of the city
residents, and at the same time not destroy the
efficiency of the railroads.
Okay.
John was continually working for the good of his
staff to get better quarters. And they moved from
the old abandoned Safeway store on Ochoa Street to
a new city hall where they weren't in a separate
building, isolated from the rest of the official
city family. Yet the Safeway building was really
updated and made into a fine office building for
his staff by Mr. Joe Hamra. It was one of the most
efficient buildings beautifully planned,
planning buildings I've ever seen. It was
perfectly located. Are we in to this now? We're
taping. It had a conference room. It had a small map
room, perhaps not large enough. Good design
quarters. Excellent reception desk. With Mrs.
Mendez behind it. Miss Mendez. Miss Mendez. Who
was his administrative assistant. A very
efficient office manager, if ever there was one.
So I understand. And a fine translator of Spanish,
and a fine correspondent in Spanish when Jonathan
had to communicate with officials in Mexico City,
by the way, over the Chamizal transfer of land.
The Civic Center, the Convention Center, the
schools, the railroad, Chamizal, carrying out
the recommendations of the 1925 plan, having it
updated periodically.
What about the mountain, Franklin Mountain? Oh,
he did. He did really work hard to preserve, I
believe, the mountain beauty of this area.
Although there was much criticism from the
current place residence uh jonathan held off the
development of crazy cat mountain i believe so
that his um delaying process at least kept that
development from getting off the ground for a
while but as he always pointed out the man who owns
the land eventually will develop it uh with um
enough determination in about the way he wants to
develop it. And Crazy Cat Mountain is being
developed now in accord with certain planning
regulations, but it has had many opposing
factions, especially in the current place. Now,
the Wilderness Park and the Guadalupe's was an
interest of John's too, When Lady Bird Johnson
came to the area, he and some people from the
Interior Department did spend a few days down
there on the Wilderness Park. And he was intensely
interested in Tom May's park, too, in the county.
His interest in planning extended beyond just the
mere boundaries of the city. And he did work with
the county commissioners on some of their plans
for park development. I would say, too, that one of
his strengths was working with the district
attorney's office in the city of El Paso. In fact,
when he retired, the city attorney's office, who
relied on Jonathan for planning and zoning law
interpretations, the district attorney's
office did give John a special award plaque for his
service to them because of his knowledge and his
willingness to share his knowledge of municipal
law zoning law with them well john was very active
in aip and was successful in pulling together
several regional conferences as well as the texas
chapter conference here several years ago, which
was, as I recall, one of the most enjoyable chapter
conferences within living memory. Yes, wasn't he
president of the Southwest Planners Group? I
think he was. I'm not quite sure. Yes, he was. And he
got the New Mexico planners interested in the
Southwestern Gulf Planning Group, too, because
they didn't seem to have any tie to any
professional regional group, and he felt they
should be a part of the whole planning picture for
the Southwest. Yes, he enjoyed all his many
contacts with planning conferences throughout
the Southwest and made every effort to go to New
Orleans and to go to Atlanta and to go to
Albuquerque College Station. College Station?
Dallas. Whenever he could, get away. He went to
American Institute of Planners meetings,
American Association of Planning Officials, and
I think to become a lifetime member of both
organizations, as I recall.
If you can think of anything more when the
transcription of this reaches you, you can add
that to it, or if there's something that you would
prefer to have deleted, you can do that as well. So
thank you very much for your time. I appreciate it,
and APA appreciates it. I'm honored.
Good morning. This is March 16th. We're at Ed
Hamlin's house in El Paso. Ed worked for quite a few
years for the planning department and is a native
of El Paso. He has a unique perspective on planning
in El Paso.
The interviewer is Robert Cornish, as has been the
case with Ann Cunningham, Nestor Valencia
yesterday. Okay, Ed, let's proceed with the
history of planning in El Paso. I won't ask you
questions regarding dates of things and that sort
of thing, but from your point of view, Why don't you
first of all consider the first half dozen or so
events that you feel were the most important in
terms of planning in El Paso that might have
impacted planning and might have changed the
nature of planning in El Paso?
I think we could first perhaps categorize some
events that were important in the overall growth
and development of the city. kind of its reasons
for the economic livelihood and why it's here. And
then sort through from that to some of the events
that had true plans and evidence. Sounds good. The
city itself, it has a
human settlement area. It has a long history. Back
in the days of the Spanish explorers, this was a
highway route between Chihuahua and Santa Fe. It
being approximately halfway between being
located next to a river in an arable valley and
having a reputation of being a year-round
snow-free pass through the mountains has its
name. The settlement grew up in this area. That
would be the first reason there was a human
settlement here at all. The growth of the American
settlement was very limited until The railroads
came in 1881. The second thing that began to spur
up, the next most significant thing that began to
spur the growth of the community here,
particularly on the American side, was the
Mexican Revolution that occurred during the
early teens of the century that caused a
tremendous flight of Mexican citizens who were on
the wrong side of the
This
early growth, the latter part of the 19th and early
part of the 20th century, had set much of the form of
the central core of the city. It was during this
period that the thinking of the white city, the
early city planning movement, began to reach as
far as El Paso. And typical of the kind of thinking
which was prevalent at the time, there was a plan.
There was a plan for all time that was prepared for
the area by a consultant, William Kessler, a man of
some notoriety within the profession.
It's interesting in a sense to go back to that early
plan and see many of the elements that continue to
have relevance and meaning to the city in terms of
its physical form that were included in that plan.
The
period which followed, particularly going into
the Depression, was a period when the city's
growth slowed down considerably. There was very
little of any population growth during that
period. El Paso at the time, say 1920, was the
biggest city between Dallas and Los Angeles, or at
least both to that. It watched its neighboring
communities grow and prosper while they tended to
stagnate.
The thing that, the element that began to, again,
causing a change in the economic dynamics of the
city, I suppose, would be the advent of the use of
Fort Bliss, a military fort here, for the
aerospace research, particularly in the postwar
period. that together with the military
populations which are brought through here, some
of which chose to later settle down in this area.
The city has been since 1950 on a rather dynamic
growth cycle. Going back to what elements within
the growth would be significant from a planning
perspective,
early decisions that were made regarding the
city's form, the early town maps and things like
that were prepared, were done by surveys, as they
would have been as they would have been. The
pattern of the city, perhaps almost owing to its
location in the southwestern region, there was a
town square created almost as
though it had been a Spanish colonial thinking of a
town plaza with the governor's mansion around
there. The city didn't have that heritage, but it
picked up that form and element from from
neighboring examples, particularly in the older
communities that trace the Spanish heritage.
So it wasn't directly modeled after the law of the
Indies? No, it was not directly modeled after
that.
Incidentally, for whoever's trying to
transcribe that, they're sandblasting my porch
right now, and you may have some difficulty
hearing me. That doesn't need to be printed. No.
Some
of the elements from the Kessler plan that became
significant that set part of the form of the city,
some of the parks that were envisioned in that
plan, some of the thinking that accompanied that
plan in terms of trying to bring about the identity
of the community through some of its resources
that would include taking advantage of the bluffs
that offered spectators.